Rework "Day 2" docs for EIB deployed helm charts on downstream clusters (#379)
suse-edge/suse-edge.github.io: asciidoc/day2/downstream-cluster-helm.adoc

.. From the selected Edge release tag revision, navigate to the Helm chart fleet - `fleets/day2/chart-templates/<chart>`

> .. *If you intend to use a GitOps workflow*, copy the chart Fleet directory to the Git repository that you will be doing GitOps from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. *If you intend to use a GitOps workflow*, copy the chart Fleet directory to the Git repository from where you will do GitOps.
```

These are just example values that are used to illustrate custom configurations over the `longhorn` chart. They should *NOT* be treated as deployment guidelines for the `longhorn` chart.
====

===== Deploy your Fleet

> Depending if your environment supports working with a GitOps workflow, you can deploy your Chart Fleet by either using a link:https://fleet.rancher.io/ref-gitrepo[GitRepo] or link:https://fleet.rancher.io/bundle-add[Bundle].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the environment supports working with a GitOps workflow, you can deploy your Chart Fleet by either using a link:https://fleet.rancher.io/ref-gitrepo[GitRepo] or link:https://fleet.rancher.io/bundle-add[Bundle].
```

  - clusterSelector: {}
----

====== Bundle

`Bundle` resoruces hold the raw Kubernetes resources that need to be deployed by Fleet. Normally it is encouraged to use the `GitRepo` approach, but for use-cases where the environment is air-gapped and cannot support a local Git server, `Bundles` can help you in propagating your Helm chart Fleet to your target clusters.

The `Bundle` can be deployed either through the Rancher UI (`Continuous Delivery -> Advanced -> Bundles -> Create from YAML`) or by manually deploying the `Bundle` resource in the correct Fleet namespace. For information about Fleet namespaces, see the upstream link:https://fleet.rancher.io/namespaces#gitrepos-bundles-clusters-clustergroups[documentation].

_Example *Longhorn* `Bundle` resource deployment using a *manual* approach:_

. Navigate to the `Longhorn` Chart fleet located under `fleets/day2/chart-templates/longhorn`:
+
[,bash]
----
cd fleets/day2/chart-templates/longhorn
----

> . Create a `targets.yaml` file that will instruct Fleet to which clusters it should deploy the Helm chart. In this case we will deploy to a single downstream cluster. For information on how to map more complex targets, see link:https://fleet.rancher.io/gitrepo-targets[Mapping to Downstream Clusters]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a `targets.yaml` file that will instruct Fleet to which clusters it should deploy the Helm chart. In this case, we will deploy to a single downstream cluster. For information on how to map more complex targets, see link:https://fleet.rancher.io/gitrepo-targets[Mapping to Downstream Clusters]:
```

+
[,bash]
----
cat > targets.yaml <<EOF
targets:
- clusterName: foo
EOF
----

> . Convert the `Longhorn` Helm chart Fleet to a Bundle resources. For more information, see link:https://fleet.rancher.io/bundle-add#convert-a-helm-chart-into-a-bundle[Convert a Helm Chart into a Bundle]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Convert the `Longhorn` Helm chart Fleet to a Bundle resource. For more information, see link:https://fleet.rancher.io/bundle-add#convert-a-helm-chart-into-a-bundle[Convert a Helm Chart into a Bundle]:
```

[#day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-overview]
===== Overview

This section is meant to give a high overview of the steps that need to be taken in order to upgrade one or multiple Helm charts that have been deployed by EIB. For a detailed explanation of the steps needed for a Helm chart upgrade, see <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-upgrade-steps>>.

.Helm chart upgrade workflow
image::day2_helm_chart_upgrade_diagram.png[]

. The workflow begins with the user link:https://helm.sh/docs/helm/helm_pull/[pulling] the new Helm chart archive(s) that he wishes to upgrade his chart(s) to.

. The archive(s) should then be placed in a directory that will be processed by the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script.

. The user then proceeds to execute the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script which will generate a Kubernetes link:https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/[Secret] YAML file for each Helm chart archive in the provided archive directory. These secrets will be automatically placed under the Fleet that will be used to upgrade the Helm charts. This is further explained in the <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-upgrade-steps, upgrade steps>> section.

> . After the script finishes successfully, the user should continue to the configuration and deployment of either a `Bundle` or a `GitRepo` resource that will ship all the needed K8s resoruces to the target clusters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. After the script finishes successfully, the user should continue to the configuration and deployment of either a `Bundle` or a `GitRepo` resource that will ship all the needed K8s resources to the target clusters. 
```

.. The resource is deployed on the `management cluster` under the `fleet-default` namespace.

. <<components-fleet,Fleet>> detects the deployed resource, parses its data and deploys its resources to the specified target clusters. The most notable resources that are deployed are:

.. `eib-charts-upgrader` - a Job that deployes the `Chart Upgrade Pod`. The `eib-charts-upgrader-script` as well as all `helm chart upgrade data` secrets are mounted inside of the `Chart Upgrade Pod`.

> .. `eib-charts-upgrader-script` - a Secret shipping the script that will be used by the `Chart Upgrade Pod` to patch an existing `HelmChart` resoruce.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. `eib-charts-upgrader-script` - a Secret shipping the script that will be used by the `Chart Upgrade Pod` to patch an existing `HelmChart` resource.
```

> .. `Helm chart upgrade data` secrets - Secret YAML files created by the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script based on the user provided data. *Should not be edited.*

Reviewer: Does it mean that the Helm chart should not be edited?  If that's the case, then following is just a suggestion: 

```suggestion
.. `Helm chart upgrade data` secrets - Secret YAML files created by the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script based on the user provided data.  The Helm chart *should not be edited.*
```

Author: It means that the Secret YAML files created by the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script should not be edited. Will change this to: `Secret YAML files should not be edited`.

> . Once the `Chart Upgrade Pod` has been deployed, the script from the `eib-charts-upgrader-script` secret is executed, which does the follwoing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Once the `Chart Upgrade Pod` has been deployed, the script from the `eib-charts-upgrader-script` secret is executed, which does the following:
```

. Create a directory in which you will store the pulled Helm chart archive(s).
+
[,bash]
----
mkdir archives
----

. Inside of the newly created archive directory, link:https://helm.sh/docs/helm/helm_pull/[pull] the Helm chart archive(s) that you wish to upgrade to:
+
[,bash]
----
cd archives
helm pull [chart URL | repo/chartname]

# Alternatively if you want to pull a specific version:
# helm pull [chart URL | repo/chartname] --version 0.0.0
----

. From the desired link:https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples/releases[relase tag] download the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script

. Execute the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script:
+
[IMPORTANT]
====
Users should not make any changes over what the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script generates.
====
+
[,bash]
----
chmod +x ./generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh

./generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh --archive-dir /foo/bar/archives/ --fleet-path /foo/bar/fleet-examples/fleets/day2/eib-charts-upgrader
----
+
The script will go through the following logic:

> .. Validate that the user provided `--fleet-path` points to a valid Fleet that can initiate a Helm chart upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Validate that the user has provided `--fleet-path` points to a valid Fleet that can initiate a Helm chart upgrade.
```

.. Process all Helm chart archives from the user-created archives dir (e.g. `/foo/bar/archives/`).

.. For each Helm chart archive create a `Kubernetes Secret YAML` resource. This resource will hold:

... The `name` of the `HelmChart` resource that needs to be patched.

... The new `version` for the `HelmChart` resource.

... The `base64` encoded Helm chart archive that will be used to replace the `HelmChart's` currently running configuration.

.. Each `Kubernetes Secret YAML` resource will be transferted to the `base/secrets` directory inside of the path to the `eib-charts-upgrader` Fleet that was given under `--fleet-path`.

> .. Furthermore the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` will ensure that the secrets that it moved will be picked up and used in the Helm chart upgrade logic. It does that by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Furthermore the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script ensures that the secrets that it moved will be picked up and used in the Helm chart upgrade logic. It does that by:
```

... Editing the `base/secrets/kustomization.yaml` file to include the newly added resources.

> ... Editing the `base/patches/job-patch.yaml` file to include the newly added secrets to the mount configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
... Edit the `base/patches/job-patch.yaml` file to include the newly added secrets to the mount configurations.
```

+
For more information regaring converting Fleets to Bundles, see link:https://fleet.rancher.io/bundle-add#convert-a-helm-chart-into-a-bundle[Convert a Helm Chart into a Bundle].

.. Deploy the `Bundle`. This can be done in one of two ways:

... Through Rancher's UI - Navigate to *Continuous Delivery -> Advanced -> Bundles -> Create from YAML* and either paste the `bundle.yaml` contents, or click the `Read from File` option and pass the file itself.

... Manually - Deploy the `bundle.yaml` file manually inside of your `management cluster`.

Executing these steps will result in a successfully deployed `GitRepo/Bundle` resource. The resource will be picked up by Fleet and its contents will be deployed onto the target clusters that the user has specified in the previous steps. For an overview of the process, refer to the <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-overview, overview>> section.

For information on how to track the upgrade process, you can refer to the <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-example, Example>> section of this documentation.

[#day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-example]
===== Example

[NOTE]
====

> The below example illustrates how to do an upgrade of an EIB deployed Helm chart from one version to another. The versions in the example should *not* be treated as version recommendations. Version recomemendations for a specific Edge release, should be taken from the <<release-notes, release notes>>.

Reviewer 2: I'd phrase this as "The example below ..."

> The below example illustrates how to do an upgrade of an EIB deployed Helm chart from one version to another. The versions in the example should *not* be treated as version recommendations. Version recomemendations for a specific Edge release, should be taken from the <<release-notes, release notes>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The below example illustrates how to do an upgrade of an EIB deployed Helm chart from one version to another. The versions in the example should *not* be treated as version recommendations. Version recommendations for a specific Edge release, should be taken from the <<release-notes, release notes>>.
```

====

_Use-case:_

- A cluster named `doc-example` is running link:https://longhorn.io[Longhorn] `1.6.1` version.

- The cluster has been deployed through EIB, using the following image definition _snippet_:
+
[,yaml]
----
kubernetes:
  helm:
    charts:
    - name: longhorn
      repositoryName: longhorn
      targetNamespace: longhorn-system
      createNamespace: true
      version: 1.6.1
    repositories:
    - name: longhorn
      url: https://charts.longhorn.io
...
----
+
.doc-example installed Longhorn version
image::day2_helm_chart_upgrade_example_1.png[]

- `Longhorn` needs to be upgraded to a version that is compatible with the Edge 3.1 release. Meaning it needs to be upgraded to `1.7.1`.

- It is assumed that the `management cluster` in charge of managing the `doc-example` cluster is *air-gapped*, without support for a local Git server and has a working Rancher setup.

> Following the <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-upgrade-steps, Upgrade Steps>>:

Reviewer: Did you mean

```suggestion
Following are the <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-upgrade-steps, Upgrade Steps>>:
```
OR 

```suggestion
Follow the <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-upgrade-steps, Upgrade Steps>>:
```

. Clone the `suse-edge/fleet-example` repository from the `release-3.1.0` tag.
+
[,bash]
----
git clone -b release-3.1.0 https://github.com/suse-edge/fleet-examples.git
----

> . Create a directory where the `Longhorn` upgrade archive will be stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a directory where the `Longhorn` upgrade archive will be stored.
```

+
[,bash]
----
mkdir archives
----

. Pull the desired `Longhorn` chart archive version:
+
[,bash]
----
# First add the Longhorn Helm repository
helm repo add longhorn https://charts.longhorn.io

# Pull the Longhorn 1.7.1 archive
helm pull longhorn/longhorn --version 1.7.1
----

> . Outside of the `archives` directory download the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script from the `release-3.1.0` release tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Outside of the `archives` directory, download the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script from the `release-3.1.0` release tag.
```

# Then execute the script
./generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh --archive-dir ./archives --fleet-path ./fleet-examples/fleets/day2/eib-charts-upgrader
----
+
The directory structure after the script execution should look similar to:
+
[,bash]
----
.
├── archives
│   └── longhorn-1.7.1.tgz
├── fleet-examples
...
│   ├── fleets
│   │   ├── day2
│   │   │   ├── ...
│   │   │   ├── eib-charts-upgrader
│   │   │   │   ├── base
│   │   │   │   │   ├── job.yaml
│   │   │   │   │   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   │   │   │   │   ├── patches
│   │   │   │   │   │   └── job-patch.yaml
│   │   │   │   │   ├── rbac
│   │   │   │   │   │   ├── cluster-role-binding.yaml
│   │   │   │   │   │   ├── cluster-role.yaml
│   │   │   │   │   │   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   │   │   │   │   │   └── sa.yaml
│   │   │   │   │   └── secrets
│   │   │   │   │       ├── eib-charts-upgrader-script.yaml
│   │   │   │   │       ├── kustomization.yaml
│   │   │   │   │       └── longhorn-1-7-1.yaml <- secret created by the generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh script
│   │   │   │   ├── fleet.yaml
│   │   │   │   └── kustomization.yaml
│   │   │   └── ...
│   └── ...
└── generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh
----
+

> In terms of changed files in Git, it should look like this:

Reviewer 2: I'd phrase this as "The files changed in git should look like this:"

+
.Changes over fleet-examples made by generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh
image::day2_helm_chart_upgrade_example_2.png[]

> . Since the `management cluster` does not support for a GitOps workflow, a `Bundle` needs to be created for the `eib-charts-upgrader` Fleet:

Reviewer 2: Can you clarify this?  If you had some external git server we could manage some group of management clusters via a GitOps workflow?

Author: This tackles the use-case where your environment does not support a local/external git server. AFAIK we have this use-case and because it is a bit more complex, I decided to cover it in the example.

. Check that the HelmChart version has been bumped:
+
.Bumped Longhorn version
image::day2_helm_chart_upgrade_example_9.png[]

. Finally check that the Longhorn Pods are running:
+
.Example for validating the longhorn-engine pod
image::day2_helm_chart_upgrade_example_10.png[]

After making the above validations, it is safe to assume that the Longhorn Helm chart has been upgraded from `1.6.1` to `1.7.1`.

[#day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-third-party]
===== Helm chart upgrade using a third-party GitOps tool

There might be use-cases where users would like to use this upgrade procedure with a GitOps workflow other than Fleet (e.g. `Flux`).

To produce the resources needed for the upgrade procedure, you can use the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script to populate the `eib-charts-upgrader` Fleet with the user provided data. For more information on how to do this, see the <<day2-helm-upgrade-eib-chart-upgrade-steps, upgrade steps>>.

After you have the full setup, you can use link:https://kustomize.io[kustomize] to generate a full working solution that you can deploy in your cluster:

[,bash]
----
cd /foo/bar/fleets/day2/eib-charts-upgrader

kustomize build .
----

> If you want to include the solution to your GitOps workflow, you can remove the `fleet.yaml` file and use what is left as a valid `Kustomize` setup. Just do not forget to first run the `generate-chart-upgrade-data.sh` script, so that it can populate the `Kustomize` setup with the data for the Helm charts that you wish to upgrade to.

Reviewer: Just for my understanding, is it "Kustomize" ?

Author: Yep, it is here are their [docs](https://kustomize.io).
